The Joe Rogan.
Experience. This book right here. I had this author the other day. Um,
his name's Sam, Sam, Gwen, uh, S se Gwen. He wrote this book, uh, empire,
the summer moon. It's amazing, man. It's about the, uh,
Manches and, uh, it's about, uh, the, the war they had with,
uh, like Texas and Oklahoma and went on forever.
Like Manches were the last holdout against the American settlers and events
against the soldiers. The Manches were the last holdouts. They were the last,
like truly wild tribe.
And they were running the planes for like hundreds and hundreds of years of
horses and. But here's the thing, man, this,
this book it's taken place in the mid 18 hundreds to the late 18 hundreds,
which is like that's. So recently it's so recent.
Yeah. The, the, the, the giant rock from Egypt came over in 1888.
Yes. Came over in 1888. Right? It was probably older than that,
but these people were essentially living
a nomadic stone, age, life,
everything was leather and sin and Buffalo tendons.
They used to make their bows and their bow strings.
They made their own bows and arrows outta wood,
and the arrow heads were made outta Flint.
They would chip away expertly and they would run around following
Buffalo and just shoot 'em with bows and arrows and SP 'em or run 'em off
cliffs. They would run 'em off cliffs that stamp peeds they'd get to the bottom.
And there were sometimes so many bodies down in the bottom of these Buffalo
jumps that the rotting would cause combustion and they would blow
up.
They would explode and catch fire just because there's hundreds and hundreds
of dead rotting, Buffalo on top of each other, cuz they can't eat that many.
Like say if you have a tribe, you know,
a tribe of hundred 50 people and you kill a thousand Buffalo,
like how many of those are you gonna eat? You can't really eat all of 'em.
So they would just let them sit there and they would literally start save
wildfires cuz they would burst into flames.
I saw bison when I was driving from salt lake city to uh,
some other gig.
I should be clear. I don't think they started massive wildfires.
I think they started a massive Buffalo fire. You know the,
the fires of the dead bodies.
I don't know if there was like to burn outside there. There must be though.
Right? Wait, it's probably grass and stuff on the ground.
Oh that's where the Buffalo were eating. But it's at the bottom of a cliff.
I don't know what was down there. But the uh, you know,
they had these areas that they would call Buffalo jumps where they would just
circle 'em on this hot and circle 'em on this high. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yell at 'em these Buffalo. Ooh where? And they just off the cliff, everybody.
And, and by the time you're running to the cliff and you realize like,
oh my God, this is a cliff. You try to hit the brakes.
There's a thousand fat behind you. Pushed you off the cliff.
Wow.
Imagine being the first Buffalo to get like really close he's like rot up to the
cliff. He's like, oh, oh, oh. Oh. He turns.
<Laugh>.
The dumbest giant beast on earth.
The dumbest elephants are smart. Right? Buffalos are so dumb.
They just run it.
Buffalos are like no disrespect to the Buffalo.
But they talk in the book about how they would shoot Buffalo.
And that like everybody had like disdain for how dumb the Buffalo were.
I think it probably made it easy for them to almost wipe 'em out to the point of
extinction. But if you shoot Buffalo below,
one goes down and the other ones look and they go right back to eating and then
another one goes down and the other look and they go back to eating.
Like you have to literally go out.
They were saying and yell at them to get them to move. Yeah.
That was the only way you got 'em away from the ones that you shot.
Cuz you wanted to eat the ones you shot. So when the ones went down,
they were like, get outta here, get the.
Right. I was gonna hang around and eat while my friends died.
Bunch of.
Dumies. But meanwhile, it's amazing animal, you know, it's like the,
if like you had a, you were gonna say that, um,
God had a plan to provide people with the perfect
for hunting. So what wants you to be eating healthy?
So I'm gonna give you millions of this enormous animal
that doesn't move. When you shoot its friends, <laugh>
literally fill the planes with these things. It just,
people were just such cuts that they killed. 'em all people were so gross.
Cuz the buffalos are so easy to kill that they just killed. 'em all they killed.
They would have mountains of bones, man. There's a Buffalo jump.
This was had the bone.
Bonfire shelter is what it's called.
It had two big events in history where it happened.
Here. Right? So they called the bonfire because uh,
all that black and apparently was because of the fires from the buffalos hitting
and bursting the flames. And some of those Buffalo jumps, they say to this day,
you can find, uh, arrowheads, if you go wandering around the area, cuz you know,
it's so populated by uh, native Americans at the time.
But the Manche dude, I think this is, uh, is this Buffalo jump in,
in um, Montana? This one's in Texas. Oh in Texas. Yeah. Yeah.
So Texas with the Comanches. There's other native American tribes there too.
But a lot of it was the Comanches, which is in this book.
A lot of this book takes place in Texas. It's amazing dude.
And so scary. There's these buffalos falling down, hitting a rock.
Look that a large rock shelter was a scene of a series of prehistoric
Buffalo jumps, native American hunting hunters, ingeniously, stampeded,
herds of bison over the edge of a cliff,
overhanging the shelter in a narrow box canyon that empties into the Rio
Grande near Lang tree, Texas,
the Bisons plunged to their deaths on a rock pile at the opening of the shelter
and their are historically documented accounts of Northern Plains,
Indian groups using this effective if indiscriminate technique of killing
bison. But you also have to remember back then,
there was so many that if they thought they killed a couple extra thousand,
they didn't give a. They were everywhere.
There were so many of them and here's why that happened.
Here's what gets even weirder.
They think that that happened because people got smallpox
and it killed like 90% of the native American population.
So when the Europeans came over in the 15 hundreds and the,
whatever it was when Cortez came over here, what was that?
Was that the 15 hundreds. Anyway,
when those guys came over and brought smallpox,
it just wiped out like most of the population.
So the Buffalo who really their major predator was people,
especially native Americans,
especially once they figured out how to ride horses, but now those dudes died.
And so the Buffalo went ham just up a storm.
And then there was millions of them, man, this an author, Dan Flores.
It has this whole, uh, paper that he wrote on it. Was it called bison, ecology,
bison diplomacy. I think it's called that's right. Something along those lines.
But it's crazy. There's you hear about the fate of the bison in,
in north America? I mean it's like the most iconic animal.
When you really think about the old west.
If there was one animal you think about the old west, maybe it'd be horses,
but more likely it'd be a bison. Yeah.
Why did they call Buffalo? Buffalo? The city of Buffalo. Good.
Question.
Cause a bison is not technically the same as a Buffalo because.
Those people don't move when they should too. <laugh>.
He set up a. He snuck that in. Good <laugh> it's good timing too.
You had a good pause there. I.
I genuinely curious. It's good. Good pause. It seems like I.
I don't know. May maybe there was a lot of Buffalo back then. There's Buffalo.
Everywhere. They were like elk elk were in literally every state.
Pretty much. We, we, people were gross, man. We killed everything.
<laugh> yeah.
The, the quick question of what's the difference is, uh, contrary to the song.
Buffalo did not roam in American west.
They're indigenous to south Asia and Africa. Buffalo, Buffalo. Well,
bison are found in north America.
Part. Yeah. That's what I'm saying. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
They call it American Buffalo, but it's a bison. It's a different animal.
The Buffalo that you get in, um, like Asia and Asian water, Buffalo.
Those are the ones they get that are in Australia.
They brought those over to a and dude, they got a mess over there.
There's nothing that kills them.
So they're just all over the place and they destroy the land. They're so big.
There's so many of them and they're wild.
They even have wild domestic cows that grow outta control and the males
become like super ferocious. Like, you know, like a bull, like a bull.
Doesn't want you riding them. Yeah.
Well they have a thing in Australia called scrub bowls.
And what it is is a domestic cattle like domestic cattle,
but that went wild like generations ago, many, many generations ago.
So now they're just wild animals. The,
that happened to have enormous horns and weigh 2000 pounds and
freak out if they see people. So they see people, if you you're too close,
they think you're closing and try to kill 'em they just you up. Oh.
That is this uh, it's crocodile CRO bun.
I think that's a water Buffalo though though.
I think that's basically what that's that's this? Wow. See that,
uh, above me is from my friend, Adam Greentree. He shot one of those. Oh,
this is crazy. He's gonna walk up to the thing. Yeah. Like he, he knows voodoo.
He put his hand on it and it just dropped. Yeah. In the real world,
he would be dead as. That thing would just smash him.
He's just touch your head. Hi. I just touch your head. Hi.
And then the bull just gave in and went down. Wow.
Yeah. So that dude, you know,
he wound up marrying the girl. That girl, that girl with the camera. No,
it was co star. Yeah. Wow. She's like, man, I could do that with a bull.
What else can you do? <laugh> yeah. Yeah, but that's all around Australia.
Those big, giant poles and then big scrub bulls, wild domestic cup.